# Dynamic functional connectivity analysis in individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder

This paper has been accepted at IJCNN conference 2023, Queensland, Australia. 

# Abstract: 

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelop- mental disorder that predominantly occurs in children. Previous brain research in ASD has mainly studied biomarkers based on the functional connectivity characterized by the correlation of static temporal signals. However, brain connectivity is dynamic and varies extensively among brain states. The main aim of the paper is to understand the fundamental group differences between ASD patients and typically developing (TD) subjects using dynamic functional connectivity (dFNC) analysis. In this study, we investigated the dFNC between $53$ independent com- ponents among $188$ ASD and $195$ TD subjects. We estimated dFNC using sliding window-based approaches and identified four distinct dynamic states through hard-clustering analysis. Hyper-connectivity within the cognitive control domain, between cognitive control and default mode network, has been identified among ASD subjects. Hyper-connectivity within the default mode network has been found among TD individuals. Further, we estimated the dynamic temporal properties such as fractional time spent, and mean dwell time per state and observed signif- icant differences between ASD and TD groups. ASD subjects are found to have significantly longer dwell time in state $4$ when compared to TD individuals. We also found a significantly increased occurrence of state $4$ in ASD subjects and states $1$ and $3$ in TD subjects. While there is broad consensus in the brain network profiles between static functional connectivity (sFNC) and dFNC, the temporal profile of brain state dynamics is additionally available with dFNC analysis and may potentially contribute to disease biomarkers.

# Implementation

1. ICNs extraction, dFNC estimation, hard clustering, statistical and meta-state analysis has been implemented using [GIFT toolbox](https://github.com/trendscenter/gift). 

1. Python script has been written to select the dataset (selection criteria is reported in the paper), to generate the plots and connectograms. 

1. Code  -
    1. Data_Selection.ipynb -- Code for the selection of data based on the criteria presented in the paper. 
    1. DFC.ipynb -- Code for generating the plots of the dynamic functional connectivity analysis. 
    1. SFC.ipynb -- Code for generating the plots of the static functional connectivity analysis. 
    1. utils.py -- Consist of all the helper functions. 

1. Directories -
    1. Phenotypes -- Contains all the CSV files required. 
    1. Parameter-Files -- Contains all the ICA, dFNC parameters generated by GIFT toolbox
    1. Mask-Generation -- Contains mask and its parameters used for the extraction of ICNs. 
    1. HTML reports -- Summary of clustering and statistical analysis as generated by GIFT. 

1. The files and codes will be helpful for reproducing the results as reported in the paper. 

For any queries, please contact krishna.chandra@research.iiit.ac.in

# Thank you


